[Amit Varma]: As we grow up, we believe that by and large, we should not interfere with other people's
[Amit Varma]: business.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems natural to transplant this thinking from individuals to countries.
[Amit Varma]: We should not interfere with another country's internal affairs.
[Amit Varma]: After all, we don't like it if other countries interfere with our own internal affairs.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: Well, what if it's not quite that simple?
[Amit Varma]: What if countries are not like people?
[Amit Varma]: What if geopolitics, unlike trade between individuals, is often a zero-sum game?
[Amit Varma]: What should we do about Maldives?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Before we begin this episode, a quick word from our sponsor for this episode.
[Amit Varma]: I love art, but I often find that I simply cannot afford to have the best fine art hanging
[Amit Varma]: on my walls.
[Amit Varma]: Equally, I have good friends who are artists, and they feel bad that they only get a one-time
[Amit Varma]: payment for their painting, unlike authors who get royalties for every single copy of
[Amit Varma]: the book that is sold.
[Amit Varma]: Well, there's a company called Indian Colors that is attempting to solve both these problems.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors licenses the work of top Indian artists and adapts it into objects of everyday
[Amit Varma]: use including wearable art like stoles and kaftans, home decor like cushion covers and
[Amit Varma]: table runners, and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to get fine art into their homes at an accessible price, and artists
[Amit Varma]: get royalties and sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: The artists whose works you'll find include luminaries like Dhruvi Acharya, Sameer Mondal,
[Amit Varma]: Vasvo Ex Vaxvo, Brinda Miller, Shruti Nelson, and my favorite, Harin Vakil.
[Amit Varma]: Do check it all out at IndianColors.com, that's Colors with an O-U, and use the code IVM20
[Amit Varma]: for a 20% discount.
[Amit Varma]: Remember, IVM20 at IndianColors.com, Colors with an O-U.
[Amit Varma]: Now let's get on with the show.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is my friend Pranay Kotasane, a fellow at the Takshashila Institution and
[Amit Varma]: the editor-in-charge of International Affairs at Pragati, the magazine I edit at ThinkPragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay has been writing a lot about the crisis in Maldives, and he's one of the foreign
[Amit Varma]: policy experts I respect the most anywhere in the world.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm delighted to have him on the show today.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay, welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Hi Amit, it's good to be back.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay, tell me a little bit about what's happening in the Maldives and why should we
[Guest]: care?
[Guest]: Okay, so a lot of political developments happened in Maldives, very interesting ones.
[Guest]: So the story starts around six years back, okay.
[Guest]: So there was one Mr. Gayoom who was ruling Maldives for a long time, even though this
[Guest]: was a presidential democracy, he ruled for a long time, and then we had the first democratically
[Guest]: elected president, Mohammad Nasheed, a few years back, around seven years back.
[Guest]: And then Nasheed was replaced by another person, and he was just unceremoniously thrown out.
[Guest]: And then we went to the current president, who is Yameen.
[Guest]: So what happened off late was all these people who are the opposition to Yameen were basically
[Guest]: declared persona non grata in Maldives, and there were around 12 political prisoners who
[Guest]: were taken up, and the Supreme Court had convicted all of them.
[Guest]: Now on 1st Feb, this changed.
[Guest]: So the Supreme Court said that this earlier conviction was wrong, and these political
[Guest]: prisoners should be freed, and that's when all hell breaks loose.
[Guest]: So Yameen says that, no, this is not done.
[Guest]: He declares presidential emergency, which means that Supreme Court is no longer in charge
[Guest]: of the political developments that are happening there.
[Guest]: And he again arrests all the Supreme Court judges.
[Guest]: Also he arrests a bunch of political people.
[Guest]: And then so that was extended till 15 days, he said that emergency would last for 15 days.
[Guest]: Now just two days back, another presidential decree has been issued, and this emergency
[Guest]: will extend for another 30 days.
[Guest]: So these are the political developments that have taken place.
[Guest]: But there are a lot of geopolitical angles to this.
[Guest]: This is just the domestic part, but the geopolitical angle is that China is seen to be backing
[Guest]: Yameen, and even six years back after, Nasheed had actually awarded a contract to GMR, which
[Guest]: was an Indian company for building their airport, which was one very big thing for Maldives.
[Guest]: And his successor just said, ousted GMR from this contract.
[Guest]: And then an international tribunal actually said that you need to pay money back to GMR,
[Guest]: this is not just done.
[Guest]: Yameen got money from China, from Saudi Arabia, etc. and gave this money to GMR and knocked
[Guest]: them off the project.
[Guest]: And the project was again started with Saudi Arabia and Chinese help.
[Guest]: So this is the geopolitical context here.
[Guest]: So yeah, that's pretty much what has happened till now.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So why should we care?
[Amit Varma]: What role has Maldives played in our foreign policy so far?
[Amit Varma]: And it's small island somewhere else, government has changed, you know, a guy who was democratically
[Amit Varma]: elected has declared himself, has effectively become a dictator, imprisoned everybody, seen
[Amit Varma]: that happen in various places across the world.
[Amit Varma]: Let it play out.
[Guest]: Why does it affect us?
[Guest]: Yeah, it does affect us.
[Guest]: So okay, let's take a background.
[Guest]: Earlier, we had recorded an episode on changing behaviors of smaller states in the Indian
[Guest]: subcontinent.
[Guest]: So it ties into this.
[Guest]: Of course, now, smaller countries in India's neighborhood are no longer, you know, tied
[Guest]: to India, they're not coupled with India that closely.
[Guest]: And they will look to balance India's overpowering influence with other countries, which is all
[Amit Varma]: fine.
[Amit Varma]: So let me clarify that before we move on earlier, small countries were because they were so
[Amit Varma]: close to us, we're almost dependent on our, you know, benevolence, and therefore they
[Amit Varma]: were tied to us in terms of foreign policy, but now they're becoming more and more prosperous,
[Amit Varma]: which is a good thing, and are also therefore becoming slightly independent.
[Guest]: Yeah, not just that.
[Guest]: And earlier, we didn't have this globalization as a concept, right.
[Guest]: So because the markets were not open, they were tied with India just because of the link
[Guest]: and India was the biggest power in the neighborhood.
[Guest]: After globalization that changed, they had more options.
[Guest]: And now even more so, because for each of these countries, if you see, actually India
[Guest]: is the only country which is in between all the South Asian countries, right, no other
[Guest]: South Asian countries connected to the other one, except going through India.
[Amit Varma]: So we are like the hub.
[Guest]: Yeah, and we are the biggest one.
[Guest]: So overwhelmingly big.
[Guest]: So it is very genuine for other countries to feel that we need to balance the power
[Guest]: of India in our country.
[Guest]: And that's all fine.
[Guest]: And now they have an option because China is also interested in this region.
[Guest]: So they can always play China with India in this and that's all fine.
[Guest]: But where I would draw the line here is, if there is anything that these countries are
[Guest]: doing, which are directly against Indian national interest, then India has to stand up there,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: Because as I explained, the president just poked India in the eye, right, and intentionally
[Guest]: getting rid of an Indian company, and then trying to boast how the Chinese are going
[Guest]: to help us is just showing that he can defy whatever India's national interests are and
[Guest]: still there won't be any consequences for that.
[Guest]: There is a second point is that the ousted president, Mohammad Nasheed, he went out on
[Guest]: Twitter and he said that it would be great if India could intervene and restore democracy.
[Guest]: So now we have a situation in which there is someone who's friendly to India, a powerful
[Guest]: political force, and he's asking for India's help.
[Guest]: So now just imagine if India doesn't do anything on this.
[Guest]: What would be the lesson that other friendly powers in other countries will draw with respect
[Guest]: to India?
[Guest]: A person at the margin would think that India is not a credible partner.
[Guest]: Why should I even deal with India?
[Guest]: Why should I even have a friendly relationship with India?
[Guest]: Because it's just not a credible partner.
[Amit Varma]: But just pray devil's advocate, you could also argue that yes, India should always uphold
[Amit Varma]: its word, which it makes to friendly nations.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, this is an individual, it's not a friendly nation.
[Amit Varma]: This is Nasheed, the individual who's no longer in power and India's approach could simply
[Amit Varma]: be that what does it matter if that small island is friends with us or not?
[Amit Varma]: What is the threat to India's interests over here?
[Guest]: Yeah, right.
[Guest]: So, see, the foreign policy game in any region is that you need to have friendly relationships
[Guest]: or friendly regimes in one country or the other so that you can use it for mutual benefit.
[Guest]: And here you clearly have a case where that's not happening.
[Guest]: So one, you would want that to change.
[Guest]: You would either want Yameen to be more friendly to you, at least in terms of respecting Indian
[Guest]: national interest.
[Guest]: And if not that, then because it's a small country, you can afford to have someone else
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: I mean, Mali's capital is 2.5 square kilometers.
[Guest]: It's not as if Indian military forces can't intervene.
[Guest]: So that is one angle.
[Guest]: So India's national interests here are affected in a few ways.
[Guest]: So first, because China is a willing supporter to this regime, at least it has tried to be
[Guest]: so, there are fears that over time, they will actually build a military base there.
[Guest]: In fact, the Yameen has already leased some of their islands to the Chinese.
[Guest]: So there is a fear that five to six years later, there might be a military base of China
[Amit Varma]: which might come here.
[Amit Varma]: And that would give them a big advantage.
[Guest]: Yes, that will definitely give them a big advantage because they don't have any significant
[Guest]: presence in the Indian Ocean.
[Guest]: They have something in Jibouti, but nothing near India.
[Guest]: Something which is that close to India will be a big, big advantage for them.
[Guest]: See, there is Diego Garcia as well, which is a military base of the US and US has adopted
[Guest]: a very hands off approach.
[Guest]: I think they are in agreement with India's stance on this.
[Guest]: So this is a perfect test case actually for India to demonstrate that if there are friendly
[Guest]: powers in the neighborhood, India will go back and help them.
[Guest]: The costs are not very high for India to intervene.
[Guest]: So what should we do?
[Guest]: So actually just things what what happened two, three days back was MEA, Ministry of
[Guest]: External Affairs in India actually issued a statement.
[Amit Varma]: Since it's a couple of days back, I should clarify that we are recording this on Thursday,
[Amit Varma]: the 22nd, and this episode releases on Monday, the 25th.
[Guest]: So those are sort of the timelines, right?
[Guest]: So what happened was Ministry of External Affairs did issue a statement that democracy
[Guest]: should be restored, the Supreme Court ruling on 1st Feb should again be restored and things
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: And Yamin just didn't listen to that and he again, extended the emergency for 30 days.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So this is what has happened.
[Guest]: Now, this is clearly Yamin demonstrating that he just doesn't care about India.
[Guest]: So all the other options of people calling that we should do some diplomatic, you know,
[Guest]: diplomatic outreach to Yamin, the time for all that is long gone.
[Amit Varma]: And it simply won't work.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: And it's gone six years back since the time the GMR incident happened, the time for that
[Guest]: is not now, it was six years back.
[Guest]: So now the only option is India should intervene and should take Yamin out.
[Guest]: And actually, my colleague Nitin Pai had written a sort of a roadmap for this.
[Guest]: So he had suggested that one thing that could be done is first the Indian army reaches their
[Guest]: army and the navy and after that Yamin is replaced and the next constitutional head
[Guest]: would be the vice president.
[Guest]: So he is brought to power.
[Guest]: And after that, there is an election coming up.
[Guest]: So an election is held.
[Guest]: And based on whatever happens in the election, the ruling party changes.
[Guest]: So that should be the mode.
[Guest]: One interesting thing that India can do is while intervening in all this, it can make
[Guest]: sure that the contracts that Maldives has already made with the Chinese companies, they
[Guest]: don't go away, you know, because that will be more acrimonious, even China will feel
[Guest]: unsettled.
[Guest]: So that could be managed.
[Guest]: So behave honorably, basically.
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Amit Varma]: And stand up to our national interest.
[Amit Varma]: So I have three hypothetical questions for you, just to play devil's advocate and sort
[Amit Varma]: of try and understand the nuances of this, which I don't, which I'm just coming to grips
[Amit Varma]: with that you're saying that we should intervene now, because A, the regime in charge is unfriendly
[Amit Varma]: with us.
[Amit Varma]: B, the regime in charge has behaved dictatorially, imprisoned its opponents in the Supreme Court
[Amit Varma]: and it's effectively a dictatorship.
[Amit Varma]: And C, most importantly, because our interests are threatened by this, because China could
[Amit Varma]: build military bases there, which would be a disaster for us and would shift the balance
[Amit Varma]: of power in the in South Asia.
[Guest]: And there's a D here, because we have a person, a former president was democratically elected,
[Amit Varma]: who is friendly towards India.
[Amit Varma]: Hypothetical question number one, supposing Yameen was democratically elected as as as
[Amit Varma]: he was, and supposing he didn't do any of this, but was allowing the Chinese to build
[Amit Varma]: those military bases.
[Amit Varma]: So it would still be against our national interest.
[Amit Varma]: But would we then have an imperative to go out and replace him?
[Amit Varma]: Yes, we would.
[Guest]: Even if he was a democratically elected?
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: Because we have to act in a national interest.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Yeah, we have.
[Guest]: See, it's not we have to understand that it's not as if Maldives is, you know, it's a tributary
[Guest]: of India.
[Guest]: It's a mutually, it's a relationship under international conduct.
[Guest]: And of course, there's a big power differential.
[Guest]: But India has gone out of the way and there are trade contacts also, all the Maldives
[Guest]: self defense forces, they get a lot of training in from India, their helicopters in their
[Guest]: self defense forces are actually Indian made.
[Guest]: So there are a lot of those connections which India has already done, you know.
[Guest]: So if in spite of all this, there is anyone democratically elected or not, who is poking
[Guest]: India in the eye by doing things which are directly against Indian national interest,
[Amit Varma]: and India has no other option but to stand.
[Amit Varma]: So follow up question, if we didn't have these historic relationship with them, where we
[Amit Varma]: trained their special forces, and, you know, where we were so close to them, if we didn't
[Amit Varma]: have those relationships, and if it was just an independent place, leaving everybody alone
[Amit Varma]: and minding their own business, and they now invited the Chinese to build up a base, would
[Amit Varma]: we then nevertheless be justified?
[Amit Varma]: Because we have to look after our own interests?
[Unknown]: Yes, yes.
[Unknown]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: So what you would say here is that, look, let's be realistic, let's not have some high
[Amit Varma]: notions of what is moral behavior.
[Amit Varma]: The point is, China would do all of these things, China would have no boundaries in
[Amit Varma]: terms of what it would do to enhance its national power.
[Amit Varma]: And for our own sake, we need to counter that.
[Guest]: And therefore, we should have no qualms either.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Yeah, I have never made the argument for we should intervene for the preservation of democracy,
[Amit Varma]: things like what the US does, we know the difference between what the neocons, the neocons
[Amit Varma]: optics don't apply here.
[Amit Varma]: So the second hypothetical question, supposing we do exactly as Nitin said, we go in there,
[Amit Varma]: we occupy the place, we get Yameen out, we put the other guy in charge, whoever is the
[Amit Varma]: next in line, and we have free democratic elections.
[Amit Varma]: What if Yameen wins again?
[Guest]: Yeah, then we'll have to lump it, we'll have to live with it.
[Guest]: And then he invites the Chinese army?
[Guest]: Yeah, then we'll have to live with it.
[Guest]: But I think the overall assessment is that Yameen has been extremely unpopular with what
[Guest]: he's done.
[Guest]: So there, of course, there will be a level of risk that we have to assess.
[Guest]: But given that previous democratically elected president is also hugely popular, I think
[Amit Varma]: these are risks which India can easily manage.
[Amit Varma]: So you would say our intervention should be to the extent of going out there and replacing
[Amit Varma]: the regime and hoping the next regime behaves correctly.
[Amit Varma]: But we should not install a puppet, we should let democracy play itself out.
[Amit Varma]: And if it turns out that the same guy comes to power and is even more pro Chinese now,
[Guest]: obviously, then we should just come back.
[Guest]: No, but he won't be more pro Chinese, because we would have demonstrated that there are
[Guest]: costs to be had when certain things which are done to India.
[Amit Varma]: But if he were to come back, we would also have demonstrated that there would be certain
[Amit Varma]: limits to our actions, and we're not actually going to kill him or imprison him.
[Guest]: Yeah, but we always have an option to do that again, that can be a threat.
[Guest]: And that next time, there won't be any promises of elections.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Really interesting.
[Amit Varma]: So what's the foreign policy?
[Amit Varma]: What's the foreign policy establishments thinking on this in India?
[Guest]: I think now, after that MEA statement, which came out, it clearly demonstrates that the
[Guest]: Indian government is very serious about Yameen.
[Guest]: But I just think it took too long, right?
[Guest]: Since six years, this has been happening.
[Guest]: And we should have preempted that certain things would have happened here.
[Guest]: And we should have taken actions much upfront.
[Guest]: And now that we've let six years pass, our options have to be at a higher escalatory
[Guest]: level.
[Guest]: So our options are gone.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Is it too late?
[Guest]: I don't think so.
[Guest]: I think it is still manageable.
[Guest]: In fact, a couple of days ago, again, there were news reports that Indian Navy and Army
[Guest]: etc are already conducting joint exercises in the vicinity of Maldives.
[Guest]: So I think the military establishment is also ready.
[Guest]: And we've done this before, like in 1988, we had intervened in Maldives, the circumstances
[Guest]: were slightly different, but I think Indian military is more than capable to do something
[Amit Varma]: like this.
[Amit Varma]: What if China decides to put its foot down, is there is a chance of escalation into a
[Guest]: full blown war?
[Guest]: I don't think so.
[Guest]: So and even if that is the case, then that is all the more reason that India should preempt
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: So earlier, there were news items again, that some Chinese ships and frigates were actually
[Guest]: spotted in the Indian Ocean.
[Guest]: But I don't think it was related to Maldives, because they returned back and they do this
[Guest]: in two, three months, in either case, they have their regular rounds.
[Guest]: So now, if the alternative scenario is that what if China comes into Maldives?
[Guest]: So I mean, we can't be waiting for the Chinese to come there and then say, what are our options,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: It's better to preempt that and prevent Chinese from coming there.
[Guest]: Because once they come, then what are our options after that?
[Guest]: Then the game is over.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So if that is the case, and we do what Nitin said now, and we conduct elections there,
[Amit Varma]: and Yamin wins again, your recommendation is that we come back.
[Amit Varma]: But what if the Chinese go there and all this happens anyway?
[Guest]: I think we can manage after that.
[Guest]: Because once we demonstrate that there are consequences to be had, and there can be even
[Guest]: higher consequences to be had, that will be enough of a deterrent.
[Amit Varma]: So even if the situation seems the same, we are a different India and they look at us
[Guest]: differently if we do that.
[Amit Varma]: So let's kind of take a step back now and talk about South Asia, like South Asia has
[Amit Varma]: changed a lot in foreign policy terms in the last couple of decades, China has become much
[Amit Varma]: more powerful.
[Amit Varma]: And recently, under Donald Trump, the US seems to have taken a step back and become more
[Amit Varma]: ambiguous about some of its dealings and India has had to adjust its mindset accordingly.
[Amit Varma]: We recently had some kind of conflicts in, you know, involving the Rohingyas, for example,
[Amit Varma]: which was a dilemma for us and then Doklam, where there was a standoff with the Chinese.
[Guest]: What's happening in South Asia?
[Guest]: Okay, so let me put it in this way.
[Guest]: First on Doklam, let's say, in Doklam, I think India aptly demonstrated that the things that
[Guest]: China does in South China Sea where it just occupies land and then says, hey, this was
[Guest]: my island from long time back and they start doing construction, etc.
[Guest]: I think India demonstrated in Doklam that India won't allow that to happen and India
[Guest]: is not a country which China can take for a ride and the strategy that it adopted there
[Guest]: in South China Sea won't operate here.
[Guest]: So that was a positive thing.
[Guest]: On with respect to the neighbours, as I earlier said, now neighbours always have an option,
[Guest]: it is perfectly in their national interest to balance India's overwhelming influence
[Amit Varma]: with that of China.
[Amit Varma]: Which is a good thing, which is fine.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, which is fine.
[Guest]: As long as it does not in direct confrontation with India's interest, we should be alright
[Guest]: with it.
[Guest]: On the Rohingya issue, I think we missed an opportunity to demonstrate that we are what
[Guest]: we call ourselves a net security provider, right.
[Guest]: That's what India likes to call itself.
[Guest]: What does it mean?
[Guest]: Explain that.
[Guest]: Yeah, it just means that overall India will provide more security to in the Indian Ocean
[Guest]: region even to other countries.
[Guest]: So now in the Rohingya case, for example, at a time when a genocide was taking place,
[Guest]: there were voices within the Indian establishment which were talking about deporting the 40,000
[Guest]: Rohingyas who are already there in India.
[Guest]: It just didn't make sense, it defies all logic, you know, even foreign policy, national interest
[Guest]: logic even, right.
[Guest]: Why should we be talking about deportation of those people when there is a huge amount
[Guest]: of influx from Myanmar anyways?
[Guest]: And what we could have done again is to back Bangladesh to the hill because Bangladesh
[Amit Varma]: took the lead.
[Amit Varma]: And they acted very honorably.
[Guest]: Yes, exactly.
[Guest]: And again, there, we had Sheikh Hasina, who is a great friend of India's, and they are
[Guest]: going to go to elections next year.
[Guest]: So it is all the more in India's interest to make sure that Sheikh Hasina comes out
[Guest]: winning on this count.
[Amit Varma]: So these are the specific issues, Roklam and Rohingyas, but overall, tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about how the balance of power is sort of shifting and the challenges that we confront
[Guest]: as a result in South Asia.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So in the Indian subcontinent, what you have is, as I said, there is a huge power asymmetry.
[Guest]: And so the China is an alternative, it is coming in.
[Guest]: And what has happened in the past few years is India is trying to manage this, the fact
[Guest]: that China is more provocative, and the fact that these countries are increasing their
[Guest]: relationship with China.
[Guest]: So that is the flux that we are operating in.
[Guest]: With regards to, and on that count, leave Pakistan aside, because that there the equation
[Guest]: is very different.
[Guest]: But in all the other countries, this equation is just playing out.
[Guest]: So there are regime changes, there are elections, etc, which are happening, and all of them
[Guest]: are happening in the backdrop of this, will the new leader support China more or support
[Guest]: India more?
[Guest]: That's how the narratives are playing out.
[Guest]: But I think in India's case, and for all the neighborhood countries, they realize that
[Guest]: they have a lot of relationship, a lot of trade, they have, it's very difficult for
[Guest]: them to go around the geography of this region.
[Guest]: I mean, we're all in those interwoven networks, and you can't just take a scissor and cut
[Guest]: it off.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So that relationship is understood.
[Guest]: And it's very difficult to get out of, get out of a good relationship with India, they
[Guest]: can't afford it, basically.
[Guest]: So in such circumstances, what India should do is, India should make clear what are its
[Guest]: red lines in terms of what these countries can, they can do whatever they want, as long
[Guest]: as it doesn't directly affect Indian national interest.
[Guest]: And as long as those red lines are met, we should be okay to manage with any country.
[Amit Varma]: And where does Pakistan come in all of this?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, China is inching closer to Pakistan for obvious reasons to use them as a counterweight
[Amit Varma]: against us.
[Amit Varma]: How has that equation changed?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, should we be worried?
[Guest]: Yeah, there are many schools of thought on this.
[Guest]: One thing is yes, people do feel now Pakistan used to have a backer called the US, now the
[Guest]: Pakistani military jihadi complex has another backer called China.
[Guest]: So should we be worried?
[Guest]: I think, yes, we should be worried.
[Guest]: What will happen is in the short term, the military jihadi complex will strengthen because
[Guest]: now it has someone to back it and its support with the US is weaning.
[Guest]: So in the short term, yes.
[Guest]: And overall, what I feel is, as China gets involved more and more with Pakistan, that
[Guest]: familiarity is definitely going to breed contempt.
[Guest]: And you will have a lot of acrimony between the two.
[Guest]: Just imagine if there will be Chinese people operating in Gwadar and in Balochistan, which
[Guest]: are again very sensitive areas, and with the language gap and things like that, there will
[Guest]: be a lot of acrimony.
[Guest]: So I think we should wait and watch for now.
[Guest]: And I do not necessarily think this is very negative for India.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And how does a foreign policy establishment need to change its view in light of all these
[Amit Varma]: developments?
[Amit Varma]: Developments in?
[Amit Varma]: South Asia overall.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, everything, you know, from Doklam to Rohingyas to Maldives to Pakistan.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I think the way we have to look at this is this way.
[Guest]: We think that whatever China is doing is against India, but that is not the case.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: There is a power play going on between U.S. and China.
[Guest]: So China wants to become what U.S. is.
[Guest]: And that is the larger game which is playing out.
[Guest]: Now, our national interest is what can we do in this ongoing power play which benefits
[Guest]: us, which means we have to do things with U.S. and with China as well.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Certain things like climate change, et cetera, our positions are closer to China rather than
[Guest]: that of the U.S.
[Guest]: So we have to try and ensure that we have enough options available so that we can extract
[Guest]: benefits from both U.S. and China and pursue our bigger goal of prosperity for Indians.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: All foreign policy is finally for that.
[Guest]: And whatever requires to be done in order to ensure prosperity for Indians, we have
[Amit Varma]: to do that.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the first things would be to stop China from overstepping in the Indian Ocean
[Amit Varma]: and do something about Maldives.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay, thank you so much for talking to us.
[Amit Varma]: I learned a lot talking to you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, do follow Pranay on Twitter at Pranay Kotas.
[Amit Varma]: P-R-A-N-A-Y-K-O-T-A-S, all one word.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of the Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay has been on the show before and he's spoken about foreign policy with me.
[Amit Varma]: So do check that out.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for listening.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the Seen and the Unseen, check out another hit show from Indus
[Amit Varma]: Fox Media Networks, Cyrus Says, which is hosted by my old colleague from MTV, Cyrus Brocha.
[Amit Varma]: You can download it on any podcasting network.
[Unknown]: As you can see, we have a podcast listener in his natural habitat.
[Unknown]: Billions of years of evolution have led him to this point.
[Unknown]: He's on his way to work and listening to podcasts makes his miserable day better.
[Unknown]: He will now head to work and use all his knowledge to communicate with other colleagues and possibly
[Unknown]: future mates.
[Unknown]: You can find more of his species on ivmpodcasts.com, your one-stop destination where you can check
[Unknown]: out all the coolest Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: Happy listening!